                        SMART ATTENDANCE MARKING SYSTEM USING FACIAL RECOGNITION
                        
                        Teja Vemparala1,Dr.Swarnalatha P2*,Anirudh Vattikuti3
                                  UG Scholars, Associate Professor*,
                               School of Computer Science and Engineering
                                Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore
                               vemparalateja18@gmail.com,hgswarna@gmail.com*
 
 
 Abstract—Nowadays, face identification has become one of the key research regions in
computer technology.Due to this scientists share a keen interest in this area.In this paper,the
authors have proposed an application of facial recognition in attendance marking system.Doing
the task manually is a tedious one for the attendance marking system when there is a huge
classroomwithmore number of students which is time-consuming. Using this facial recognition
system avoids the issue of dummy attendance is possible,proxies and save time.In previous
facial recognition attendance systems, there were some drawbacks such as intensity of
light,head pose etc.The main research of this paper is to overcome those problems and provide
the most accurate attendance marking system.Detection of the student and marking the student
attendance while entering the school room is automatically made with this system.This paper
defines the prototype of the device and the algorithms used at each level. Algorithms such as
Viola-Jones for face detection, PCA for feature selection and SVM for classification have been
used.The proposed method gives an efficient way to control the attendance and records of students
to that of traditional attendance marking system.
IndexTerms: Automatic Attendance,Biometrics,Face Recognition,Smart attendance.
1 INTRODUCTION
IN the contemporary age of computerization, various novel approaches have been
occupied the position to save labor and human intervention.In the same way, facial
recognition(FR) is one of the key areas of development in thefield of computer
science and it is the greatestwell-organized biometric method for identifying people.
Using this technique in education ground as automated face recognition attendance
marking system which is way different from traditional attendance marking system
as it is time consuming[1].Inspite of the easiest way for using the FR system in mass
manner set up, the real execution will be difficult as it requires to consider the maximum
exploration of differences that exists in brightness, face mask structures, differences
in position, copy determination, device sound, watching remoteness
etc.Numerous FR attendance systems were done with everyone’s contribution of their
strengths and weakness[2].The main aim of this research is to overcome those problems.The
modern development of machine learning and neural networks and its
applications in face recognition helps the process more accurate and efficient. The
attendance marking system generally consists of following steps such as Image Acquisition,Database
development,Pre-processing,Face-detection,Feature extraction and
classification and at last, the article end with post-processing stage[3].In the very first
stage of attendance recognition system, detection of the faces of students using a
voila-jones algorithm and process it through histogram normalization through
100x100size of a pixel,pre-process it finally store it in the database have been carried
out.Enormous techniques were made for face detection i.e. AdaBoost algorithm, the
Float Boost, Neural Networks, Bayes classifier and the Support Vector Machines
(SVM). The maximum competence of the FR attendance system algorithm was raised
with the fast face and robust recognition procedure.Here algorithms such as ViolaJones
for face detection, PCA for feature selection and SVM for classification are
applied. The further tasks of the paper consists of study work, the in depth implementation
of the proposed model and finally results,conclusion and possibility for future
development.
2 LITERATURE SURVEY
In this paper[4] the research is mainly focused on the developing of a computerized
attendance storing system with the outcome having an audio in the tutorial sessions
or any studyhall so that the staff can calculate the undergraduate's attendance. This
will be very helpful for the faculties as it saves most of the time as well as the effort
especially if there are plenty of students in a class. Generally,in a class ,many students
will be there,so it captures all of the student’s faces and takes the attendance only the
faces which are identified.This system shows the use of facial recognition technology
and how it will be helpful for the attendance marking.It can also be useful for the
exam related issues. But it cannot identify the faces which are similar and have similar
facial features
Here[5] the author proposed a model for face detection attendance system. Here the
system is based on two databases one is student database and another one is the storage
database.Firstly the process starts with capturing the images of all the students in
the classand images of all the student's related masks will be calculated by the facial
features in the images i.e., noselips,eyes mainly. Another database in the system is the
attendance database. It uses to mark the attendance of the particular student.A camera
isinstalled at the front of the classroom in order to cover the whole classroom.After
the camera captures the images noise-removal techniques are applied on them. Gabor
filters are applied to that images after that so that facial features are considered.
In this paper[6] they proposed a model for face detection computerized attendance
system. The proposed prototypeis mainly focused on the face detection and recognition
algorithms. This system works very efficiently.It can easily recognize the students
when they enter the classroom.If it matches with the any of the database images 
3
he/she will be marked as present for the particular session or else they will be marked
as absent. This system mainly consists of the feature extraction,preprocessing,imageacquisition,databasedevelopment
and the classification stages
and then the post-processingstage.These stages are the main stages in the automated
attendance marking system.
Hemanth Kumar Rathod[7] proposed a specific methodology for recording the attendance
can be done manually either by the teacher or the lecturer.This process is time
taking and need more effort.It can’t guarantee that there will be no proxies in the
class and any other errors.So to solve these type of issues a facial recognition with
biometric feature has been found, that has a lot of phases like image acquisition,face
detection,feature extraction,face classification etc. The attendance can eventually be
marked.In this system,using the algorithms like voila jones and the classifiers like
SVM so as to get the desired results.By using this system, considering the attendance
of the student without any effort from the teacher or the lecturer.But it needs the elements
like camera,laptop or the computer and the local network.This methodology is
very simple to understand,use,most reliable and secure.
In this paper[8] they proposed a model for attendance management
system.Thissystem requires various techniques which are already existed and can use
with some modifications.The first step is to design such a system on the facial recognition.The
functioning of the algorithms needs to be understood so that the face detection
dynamics can be understandable.This system can work most efficiently as the
authors are using the engine's face detection algorithm.It actually divides the image
into smaller parts.It will be easy to compare the smaller parts rather than covering the
whole face.By the implementation of the algorithm,the authors were able to track the
face of the student.It can be done three ways i.e, head tracking,facial feature
tracking,completetracking.It has high accuracy and can be used multiple times.It will
be very useful in the online examinations and also for marking the attendance in the
classrooms automatically.
In this paper[9] they proposed a model useful for real-time face identification and
recognition.It mainly requires the camera that will be used to capture the images of
the students that will be installed in the classrooms to capture the video frames and for
capturing the multiple faces.Those captured faces will be cropped and will be converted
to the grayscale so that the number of bits will be reduced that needs to be
processed.Then the faces will be compared with the images which are already stored
in the database.If it matches with the any of the database images it will be marked as
present.It includes several phases like database creation,HOG features, face
detection,SVM classifier,recognition attendance.When the system finds the image it
captures the image a lot of times continuously.It records the attendance of each and
every person and comes out with the best-localized image.With this system, the
teacher or the lecturer will find it easy to take attendance without any extra effort and
the cost.It needs the elements of thecamera,laptop,and the network connection.It is
more secure and reliable and easy to use. 
4
3 PROPOSED MODEL
The main objective of this face detection automated smart attendance system is to
provide a system that is reliable,practical and eliminates time loss and disturbance in
traditional attendance systems.The proposed model depends on face identification
and recognition algorithms.The system architecture of proposed model is shown below.

 Fig-1: System Architecture for Face recognition Attendance System
In order to execute the proposed prototype,the authors have following algorithm to be
considered as shown below:
 ALGORITHM
 Pseudo Code for the proposed prototype
1. Click the pupil’s photo.
2. Implement theViola-Jones algorithm on face recognition.
3. Extracting the Region of Interest [ROI] in the form of Rectangular Box.
4. Converting it intograyscale,applying the Histogram Equalization and Resizing
it to 100x100 pixels
5. Store the pre-processed Image into Database
6. Applying the Principle Component Analysis[PCA](For feature Extraction)
and SVM(for Classification)
7. Post-Processing
Now the following stages to implement the proposed algorithm for face Detection and
recognition are considered. 
5
3.1 IMAGE ACQUISITION:
The camera is put in the studyhall at a separation to capture the images of people
present in class. The image that is clicked is given as the input to the application.
 Fig-2 Extracted and captured faces
3.2 Face Detection:
The efficiency of such FR systems is augmented by a systematic algorithm. Many
numerous algorithms are proposed such as Face geometry methods,Feature Invariant
methods,Machine learning based methods,etc.Among them,use of Viola - jones detection
algorithm which gives high detection rate and also secure were made.This algorithm
is more preferred for real-time problems for its efficiency. Viola-Jones calculation
is connected to this casing, which identifies the faces in the casing. To guarantee
that the recognized part is confronting, each distinguished protest is edited and further
prepared for eye discovery and if eyes are identified they are considered as faces else
are rejected. Highlights of the considerable number of throws are extricated utilizing
diverse facial highlights, for example, the nose, eyes, the distance between eyes, and
so on.
Fig-3 Face detection for training the data 
6
3.3 Pre-Processing:
The facial features detected in the captured image are extricated and subjected to preprocessing.
In this stage, histogram equalization, which is one of the most popular
histogram normalization methods is applied on the picture and its resolution will be
changed to 100x100. This expands the span of potency of the picture thereby making
it clearer with a better contrast.
3.4 Development of the Database:
In this stage, the picture of each pupil is clicked and the biometric attribute is extricated
from it. Preprocessing is applied on these attributes and then they are stored in
the database. We have used pictures of a few students captured in dissimilar angles,
facial expressions and lighting.
3.5 Feature selection and Extraction:
Now the feature selection and extraction of the captured image is the important module
of the total attendance recognition system.For a reliable,compatibleand error-free
face recognition system this paper need good feature extraction attributed and good
classification and detection algorithm.The performance of a face recognition mainly
depends upon good classification algorithm.Now here the article used Viola-jones
Algorithm for face detection as it is the most accurate face detection algorithm for
real-timeapplication.High detection rate and low false positive rate are notable features
of the viola-jones algorithm. Here the manuscript take the implementation of
HAAR features. Most of the faces of individuals have a few common properties. For
e.g., the skin around the eyes is slightly darker than that of the upper cheeks and the
skin on nose bridge is slightly brighter then that around the eyes.Here, using PCA for
feature extraction and SVM for pattern classification have been made.
PRINCIPAL COMPONENT ANALYSIS
It is commonly known as the method of selection of the features as well as the reduction
of the dimensions.It will be used for the extraction of principal components of
multidimensional data.It was the first algorithm which is used for the representation
of the faces economically. In PCA the faces will be captured by the camera and by
using the eigenfaces the captured faces will be shown along with the corresponding 
7
projections of the image.Only the meaningful dimensions will be considered instead
of all the dimensions of the image.The image will be represented mathematically
using PCA as

 χ = WY + µ
Here the face vector is χ,theeigenface vectors areY, the featurevector is W and the
average face vector is µ.In the recognition of the faces, these will be used as the features
for classification.Eigenfaces have introduced early for the use of the analysis of
the principal components to solve the problems of the recognition of the faces.
SUPPORT VECTOR CLASSIFIER
Support Vector Machine (SVM) Classifier is a binary classifier. Here the hyper plane
will be used like decision function.Regarding the presence of an object such as the
human after the training of the images containing the particular object, the decisions
will be taken by the SVM classifier. Here the PCA will be used for the extraction of
the features and SVM will be used for the classification.SVM has been proposed recently
that it is the best and the most effective classifier for the recognition of the
patterns. For the recognition of the patterns, SVM finds the closest points which are
there in the training set that can be done linearly or non-linearly.The recognition of
face has two stages.They are classification and the extraction of the features.The previously
mentioned feature extractors joined with classifiers are thought about in different
true situations, for example, lighting conditions, Unintentional facial element
changes, Expressions.
System Performance is additionally assessed with respect to acceptance rate,distance,
false positive rate,time which is required for the planning. Detachment additionally
plays as a basis in this structure show as the picture diagrams are caught when an
individual goes into the room and face region is resized. So the face region got at
around 4 feet and 7feet gives better results. For the Training, data of 150 pictures
preparing time is determined.
3.6 Face Recognition:
After face detection and pre-processing of the captured image,depending upon the
features of face ,feature comparison will happen. So, whenever it detects the face it
matches the faces captured in the database if it matches, the attendance is marked.As
per the experiment, most of the faces are recognized correctly. Fig 4 shows the recognized
face along with the registered number.
8

 Fig-4 Face Recognition with Registered number
3.7 Post Processing:
In our proposed system, the details of pupils are updated in the database after their
faces are detected. The database system uses exporting mechanism and creates a sheet
bearing all those details.
GRAPHICAL USER INTERFACE[GUI]
The GUI is used for face detection and recognition as shown below figures.The first
part of the GUI is where the authors register the student name and Registration number
along with the face for training the detected faces.


 Fig-5 GUI for registration number and Name of Students 
9
Now after capturing all the faces as shown in fig 3 the faces should be trained with the
algorithm and extracted features for more accuracy of face detection.For training of
these faces present in the database as shown in the figure-6 below
Fig-6 Captured images in thedatabase after pre-processing
The authors developed a GUI which traces the images in the database before face
recognition after adding to each new face in the database for increasing the accuracy
of detection as shown in below figure-7.


Fig-7 Training the dataset
4 RESULTS
The face detection and recognition system are simple yet efficient than other attendance
systems. Here, development of a GUI as shown above to manage the total system.
After face registration with the name and Reg no, extraction of the detected image
and pre-processing with Histogram equations for storing in the database have
been made.Now the feature extraction and classification of these images can be done 
10
by PCA and SVM as shown above then this paper deals with training of the dataset
for accurate results.Finally after detection of theface as shown in fig-8 the attendance
is marked and stored in anExcel sheet as shown in the fig-9 below.
Fig-8 Showing the student is recognized along with the registration number.
Fig-9 Excel Sheet showing the attendance w.r.t time and date 
11
5 PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

 Fig -10 Performance Analysis of PCA + SVM with other algorithms
6 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The smart face recognition system is proven as most efficient attendance system
among all other attendance systems due to its consistency,robust and accuracy but
also it can have its own limitations.In this system,algorithms such as Principal
Component Analysis for feature extraction and SVM as classifiers which outperforms 
12
other algorithms in real-time applications have been applied and proved as best for
this attendance systems.The overall system is implemented in python.
The future work is to improve the recognition rate with other algorithms as human
changes as time such as growing beard, glasses,scarf etc. This system is too developed
to recognize 3-4 people at a time and in future the authors canimprove its recognition
rate and achieve greater performance and efficiency.
7 ACKNOWLEDGMENT
With all respect and gratitude, the authors would like to thank Prof.Swarnalatha P for
guiding us throughout the project and also to all the people who helped directly and
indirectly for completion of our project successfully.
8 REFERENCES
[1] M. Turk and A. Pentland, Eigenfaces for recognition, Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
3(1), pp. 7186, 1991USA: Abbrev. of Publisher, year, ch.x, sec. x, pp.
xxx–xxx.
[2] B. K. Mohamed and C. Raghu - "Fingerprint attendance system for classroom
needs", in India Conference (INDICON), 2012 Annual IEEE. IEEE, 2012,
pp.433438.
[3] S. Kadry and K. Smaili - "A design and implementation of a wireless iris recognition
attendance management system", Information Technology and control, vol.
36, no.3, pp. 323329, 2007.
[4] Poornima, S., Sripriya, N., Vijayalakshmi, B., &Vishnupriya, P. (2017). Attendance
monitoring system using facial recognition with audio output and gender
classification. International Conference on Computer, Communication, and Signal
Processing: Special Focus on IoT, ICCCSP 2017, 0–4.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCCSP.2017.7944103
[5] Sajid, M., Hussain, R., & Usman, M. (2014). A conceptual model for automated
attendance marking system using facial recognition. 2014 9th International Conference
on Digital Information Management, ICDIM 2014, 7–10.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDIM.2014.6991407
[6] Chintalapati, S., & Raghunadh, M. V. (2013). Automated Attendance Management
System Based On Face Recognition Algorithms. 2013 IEEE International
Conference on Computational Intelligence and Computing Research, 1–5.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCIC.2013.6724266 
13
[7] Rathod, H., Ware, Y., Sane, S., Raulo, S., & Pakhare, V. (2017). Automated Attendance
System using Machine Learning Approach, 0–4.
[8] Malik, R., Kumar, P., Verma, A., &Rawat, S. (2017). Prototype model for an
intelligent attendance system based on thefacial identification. 2016 International
Conference on Information Technology, InCITe 2016 - The Next Generation IT
Summit on the Theme - Internet of Things: Connect Your Worlds, 40–43.
https://doi.org/10.1109/INCITE.2016.7857586
[9] Balcoh, Naveed Khan, et al. "Algorithm for efficient attendance management:
Face recognition based approach." JCSI International Journal of Computer
Science Issues 9.4 (2012).
[10] AksharaJadhav, AkshayJadhavTusharLadhe, Krishna Yeolekar.(2017)AUTOMATED
ATTENDANCE SYSTEM USING FACE
RECOGNITION.
[11] Priyanka Wagh,JagrutiChaudhari,RoshaniThakare,Shweta Patil.Attendance System
based on Face Recognition using Eigenface and peA Algorithms.
[12] Shehu, Visar, and Agni Dika. "Using real-time computer vision algorithms in
automatic attendance management systems." Information Technology Interfaces
(ITI), 2010 32nd International Conference on. IEEE, 2010. 
